short selling is misunderstood by many
traders that's why it's often labeled as
dangerous and unethical but in reality
understanding short selling is a must
for traders of any kind besides giving
you much more versatility understanding
short sellers will increase your
understanding of the markets in general
even if you don't want to short sale
yourself with that being said it is
fundamental to be aware of the risks of
short selling in this video you will
learn what short selling is why you
would want to short sell how to manage
the risks associated with short selling
and everything else that you need to
know first of all what is short selling
shorting a stock is the opposite trade
action of buying instead of profiting
from an increase in the underlying price
you profit from falling prices so
instead of buying shares of a stock you
sell shares to open your position but
how can you sell something that you
don't own to answer this question let me
give you an example let's say Petrie
borrows a high-end speaker system from
his friend who is going to be out of the
country for the next year instead of
actually using his friend speaker system
Peter has an idea to generate some extra
income with it therefore Peter says the
speaker for $10,000 because he expects
the speaker to be valued lower in one
year one week before his friend comes
home he finds the exact same speaker
system which has dropped in price by
about $2,000 and buys it back for $8,000
Peter now has $2,000 richer and his
friend hopefully won't suspect a thing
except for the betrayal of a friendship
this is basically how short selling
works you borrow something sell it on
the open market then buy it back pocket
the difference and finally return the
borrowed item to the lender in financial
markets this item is typically a
security such as shares of a stock and
the lender usually is your broker dealer
note that when shorting it is you who
carries the risk and not the lender if
the price of a security goes up after
you shorted it you
we'll lose the difference between the
entry price and the current price for
each share that you shorted short
selling might seem much more complicated
than buying a stock since you have to
borrow shares and give them back later
but in reality shorting a stock is just
as seamless as buying one all you have
to do is select cell in your broker
platform and everything else is done for
you as soon as you open your position it
will automatically borrow shares from
your broker and you will automatically
give them back as soon as you close the
position to fully understand short
selling let me walk you through one last
example of a short stock position let's
say you think X Y Z's price which is
currently trading at $100 will drop over
the upcoming weeks
therefore you decide to short 100 shares
of XYZ for this your broker
automatically lends you these 100 shares
and you sell them on the open market now
the payoff profile of your XYZ short
position looks like this for every $1
drop in XYZ your position gains $100 and
for every $1 increase in X Y Z's price
your position loses $100 so basically
it's a mirror image of a long stock
position if X Y Z's price drops down to
$95 and you close the position you will
have a total profit of $500 and the
borrowed shares will automatically be
returned to your broker since you now
hopefully understand how short selling
works let's take a look at the risks of
short selling compared to buying short
selling has some additional risks that
you have to be aware of the first and
most talked about risk is the
theoretical infinite risk of a short
stop position when buying stocks the
loss is limited to the size of your
initial investment this is not the case
for short stock positions when buying
your loss is limited because a stock's
price can't fall below zero dollars but
there's no upside limit that a stock's
price can't surpassed that's also the
reason why you can lose more than 100%
of your initial investment on a short
stock position
as a stock's price can always go higher
in theory there is no limit to the loss
of a short position in reality however
this isn't actually the case or have you
ever seen a stock price rise to infinity
nevertheless it's very important that
you keep your risk and position sizing
in check when short selling to avoid big
losses
you should always define a max loss
point before opening a short position
furthermore it is crucial to keep
position sizing small when short setting
the next risk to be aware of when short
selling is the risk of buy-ins since
you're trading with borrowed shares
there is a risk that the lender of these
shares will want their shares back the
lender typically will be your broker but
depending on the situation they might
want to get back their shares earlier
than anticipated if that's the case your
short position will be closed so that
the lender can get back their shares the
longer you plan on holding your short
stop position
the higher the odds of a buying become
typically this risk however is very low
as long as you're trading highly liquid
securities besides buy ins shrewd
sellers should also be aware of
so-called short squeezes short squeezes
are a certain type of market phenomenon
that can dramatically push up prices on
stocks with many short sellers to close
a short position you have to buy back
the soiled shares if a stock has a
sudden increase in its price many short
sellers will want to buy back their
position to cut potential losses this
creates a lot of buying pressure which
will push up prices even more which will
force even more short sellers to cover
their position and this cycle continues
over and over again that's why heavily
shorted stocks often have sudden spike
prices to completely irrational levels
this is especially a repeating pattern
in the world of low cap equities next up
let's take a quick look at the costs
associated with short selling besides
having to pay broker commissions you
also need to pay borrow fees since you
are borrowing shares from your broker
these are typically quoted in a yearly
interest percentage the size of
borrowing fees can vary tremendously
depending on the availability of shares
to short they might be less than 1% or
as high as over 100 percent but if you
aren't planning on holding your position
for more than a couple of days
these borrowing fees are negligible you
now should know almost everything you
need to know about short selling except
for how to actually short seller so
let's take a look at that next first of
all you need a broker that allows you to
short serve even though most brokers
support short selling there are some
exceptions
besides the right broker you also need
the right brokerage account you will
only be able to short sell in a margin
account since you're borrowing shares
you won't be able to short sell in a
cash account last but not least they
have to be shares available to short
shorting requires you to borrow shares
and sometimes there is no one that you
can borrow these shares from if that's
the case there are no shares available
to short
this however is typically only the case
if you're trading highly shorted lower
cap stocks as long as you're trading
highly liquid and well-known securities
this will rarely be an issue some
brokers are better at locating shares -
sure than others and some brokers even
allow you to reserve shares too short
reserving shares too short gives you the
ability to later open a short position
without having to worry that there might
not be any shares too short but note
that reserving shares too short won't be
free of charge so make sure to consult
your broker for the specific fee
structure before doing this short
selling can be a great addition to your
trading arsenal since it allows you to
profit from bearish market action
let me now quickly recap some of the key
points that were covered in this video
to short sir you borrow shares from your
broker sell them on the open market buy
them back and then return them to your
broker the difference between the entry
and exit price determines your P&L
especially when short selling it is
crucial to closely watch and manage your
risk
you are a few things to look out for
when doing this firstly focus on highly
liquid securities secondly keep your
position sizes small and always
determine a clear risk level before you
open a position a stop-loss order is a
great way to automate your loss taking
process
moreover make sure to not hold on to
your short positions for too long
otherwise the borrowing fees might eat
up any attempt at profits and the risk
of a buy-in also increases a great
alternative to short selling that also
allows you to profit from falling prices
or options with the right option
strategies you can even profit from
dropping prices while still keeping your
max risk limited for instance the payoff
diagram of a put option looks like this
as you can see a long put is a limited
risk position with the huge upside
potential to learn more about options I
highly recommend checking out my free
options trading courses on trade options
with me comm with that being said I hope
you enjoyed this video and learn
something new if you did don't forget to
smash the like button subscribe and turn
on the notification bell thanks for
watching
you